---
layout: post
title: "Negotiations"
description: "Effective negotiation involves preparation, priorities, and flexibility."
tags: [better]
---

Negotiating can be a daunting task, but with the right preparation and
approach, you can increase your chances of success. One of the key elements to
successful negotiation is taking the time to prepare before the actual
meeting.

The more time you put into pre-negotiations, the better. By preparing in
advance, you'll be able to calmly evaluate trade-offs and have pre-formulated
responses ready. It's important to know what's important to you and what you
can give away for leverage. Additionally, try to figure out what's important
to the other party and where you two might run into conflict.

One effective way to prepare is to conduct research on the other party and the
industry. This could include researching their past deals, understanding their
business model, and identifying any potential pain points or areas where they
may be more flexible. By understanding the other party's perspective and
priorities, you can tailor your approach and make more effective arguments
during the negotiation.

For example, let's say you are negotiating with a company that prioritizes
cost savings. In this case, you may want to emphasize how your product or
service can help them reduce costs in the long run. Additionally, you may want
to be prepared to discuss any discounts or flexible pricing options that you
can offer to help them meet their cost-saving goals.

When preparing, it's also important to determine what's reasonable and what's
your max and min range around that. One way to estimate what's reasonable is
to compare to a similar good or service, or use another industry or product
for proxy numbers. It's also important to determine your maximum and minimum
price without offending the other party.

During the negotiation, don't be afraid to ask for the other party's
reasoning. Asking questions like "Why do you think that's a reasonable price?"
or "How did you come up with that timeline?" can provide valuable insight and
help you make informed decisions.

Another important aspect of negotiation is determining what's important and
what's giveaway. Make a list of the things that are non-negotiable from your
perspective and rank them in order of importance. Additionally, make a list of
things you can give/take on to sweeten the deal for the other party. Examples
of things you might be flexible on include payment terms, dates, quality, or
product features..

When thinking of your priorities and non-negotiables, it's important to have a
clear understanding of what you want to achieve and what you are willing to
give up in order to reach a deal. One way to do this is to make three lists:
Must Have, Nice to Have, and Give Away. This will help you prioritize your
goals and make it clear to the other party what you are looking for.

For example, let's say you are negotiating the terms of a contract with a
client. Your Must Have list might include a specific payment schedule, a
certain level of quality, certain features, or a specific delivery date. Your
Nice to Have list might include additional services or a longer contract
term. And your Give Away list might include things like discounts or a more
flexible delivery schedule. By identifying your priorities in advance, you can
be more effective in the negotiation and make sure that you get what you want
out of the deal.

In addition to preparing, it is also important to be aware of your own
emotional state during the negotiation. It's easy to get caught up in the heat
of the moment and make decisions based on emotions rather than logic. Try to
stay calm and composed during the negotiation and avoid getting into a power
struggle with the other party. Instead, focus on finding common ground and
working towards a mutually beneficial solution. Don't be afraid to pause,
suggest circle back to a point, or even recommend reconvening later.  Tell the
other party you'll need to check with your boss before discussing further.

Incentives and penalties are also important to consider. Think about what
you're likely to mess up and how you can minimize those
penalties. Additionally, think about what outcomes or assets are most
important to you and how you can protect those interests.

When discussing price, it's important to consider the effect of
anchoring. This technique involves establishing a starting point for the
discussion, typically by being the first to mention a price. This can be a
powerful tool because it sets the reference point for all subsequent offers
and counter-offers, influencing the other party's perception of what is
considered a fair or reasonable price.

If you have a strong preference on a price, you may want to consider being the
first to mention a number. However, be aware that this can be a double-edged
sword as it can put off the other party if they feel it is unreasonable. On
the other hand, if the other party is the first to mention a price that is
lower than what you desire, you can try to re-anchor at a higher number by
using other pricing examples or highlighting features that differentiate you
from the anchor they established.

When it comes to signaling a price, it's important to remember that the goal
is to arrive at maximum utility for all parties. Emphasize this throughout the
discussion to assure the other parties that you're trying to work with them.

In conclusion, negotiation is an art form that requires preparation and a
thoughtful approach. By taking the time to prepare beforehand, determining
what's important and what's giveaway, and focusing on incentives and
penalties, you can increase your chances of success. Remember, every time you
walk away from a negotiation, you may feel like you could have driven a harder
deal, but it's important to remember that building a long-term working
relationship is often more important than winning a single negotiation.



[npr]: http://www.npr.org/sections/money/2012/12/28/168197017/what-a-former-fbi-hostage-negotiator-can-teach-us-about-the-fiscal-cliff
[Harvard]: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_of_Harvard_Principled_Negotiation
