---
title: "Do research backwards"
description: "Pick your goal and work backwards to fill in the pieces"
layout: post
tag: [medicine,research]
---

Research experience is highly valued in competitive graduate programs, medical
schools, and surgical residency programs. Engaging in research demonstrates
your commitment to learning and advancing your field. However, getting started
with research can feel overwhelming, especially as a trainee when you don't
have perspective to know what's important. In this blog post, I propose a
unique approach to conducting research by starting with your goal in mind and
working backwards to fill in the necessary pieces. This approach will help you
navigate the research process more effectively and increase your chances of
success.

*Target A Journal.* To begin your research journey, choose a journal that
aligns with your field of interest. Let's say you are a neurosurgical
resident. You might explore the latest issue of the Journal of Neurosurgery
(JNS) or Neurosurgery journal. Skim through the articles and identify one that
catches your attention.

Suppose you come across a study on the use of functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) in preoperative planning for brain tumor resection. Study this
article diligently, either in digital format or by printing it out and marking
it up. Take notes, highlight important points, and pay attention to the study
design, methodology, and results.

While studying the chosen article, resist the temptation to immediately chase
down every citation mentioned in the text. Instead, mark the citations that
you believe are important but hold off diving into them right away. At the
end, select the three most crucial citations and study them with slightly less
intensity. This approach allows you to focus on the most relevant and
impactful references.

*Copy structure.* Create a new document and use the outline from the article
you are studying as a starting point. Include sections such as abstract,
introduction, methods, results, discussion, and any figures or tables. By
adopting the structure of a published article, you gain insight into how to
structure your own research.  Additionally, for each figure or table, start a
spreadsheet to organize the corresponding data. This step ensures that you can
easily reference and analyze the data during the research process.

Remember, you can accomplish all of these steps without a mentor initially.
Once you have completed these tasks, approach a mentor and seek their guidance
on the topic. Ask them if they have encountered the subject matter, possess
relevant data, or consider it important. Their expertise can provide valuable
insights and direction for your research.

*Target A Conference.* Conferences provide an excellent platform to showcase
your research and network with professionals in your field. Start a document
where you compile a list of upcoming conferences along with their dates for
the next 12 months.  Websites like
[ConferenceAlerts.com](https://conferencealerts.com/) or the official websites
of neurosurgery professional organizations can help you find relevant
conferences.

For each conference, create bullet points outlining the abstract or project
you intend to submit. As your research progresses, you can modify and
rearrange these bullet points accordingly. Sharing this document with your
advisor keeps them informed of your research direction and enables them to
provide feedback and guidance.

To stay organized, hyperlink the document to the current version of your
submission. You can use cloud storage platforms like Google Drive or Dropbox
to store your research documents and easily share them with collaborators or
mentors.

*TBD.* At the bottom of the document, create a section labeled "To Be
Determined" where you can jot down long-term ideas and plans for future
research projects.  This section serves as a repository for potential research
directions that may not be fully developed yet. It allows you to brainstorm
and revisit these ideas as your knowledge and skills grow. In MS Word, I
created an autocomplete so that anytime I type "###" it automatically changes
it to be highlighted in yellow so these spots stand out.

*Identify mentors.* Finding influential individuals in your program or field
who are working in areas that align with your interests can be immensely
beneficial. Stay updated on their latest work by following their publications
and attending any seminars or presentations they give. For example, if you are
a neurosurgical resident interested in neuro-oncology, you might identify a
senior attending who has published extensively in that area.

Approach these individuals and express your interest in their work. Share your
thoughts and insights on their latest research findings or innovations. By
showing genuine interest and knowledge, you demonstrate your commitment to the
field and create a foundation for collaboration. Consider proposing a research
project or asking if you can assist them with their ongoing studies.

*Peer collaboration.* Build connections with peers who have similar research
interests. They may be excellent collaborators and co-authors for your
projects. Attend departmental meetings, conferences, and research seminars to
meet and network with like-minded individuals. Engaging in research with your
peers not only enhances the quality of your work but also fosters a supportive
and collaborative environment.

Embarking on a research journey can be a daunting task, especially for
graduate students, medical students, surgical residents, and early career
attendings. By adopting the "do research backwards" approach, you can navigate
the research process more effectively. Start by targeting a journal, study an
article that interests you, and create a structured outline based on the
article. Then, set your sights on conferences and begin outlining potential
abstracts or projects for submission. Finally, identify influential
individuals in your field and establish connections. Remember, research is a
continuous learning process, and your persistence and dedication will propel
you toward success in your academic and professional pursuits.
